disclaimer
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced by any means, graphic, electronic, or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping or by any information storage retrieval system without
the written permission of the author, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles or
reviews. Readers should be aware that Internet Web sites offered as citations and/or sources for further
information may have changed or disappeared between the time this book was written and when it is read.



Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the author has used his best efforts and knowledge in
researching and preparing this book, he makes no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy
or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaims any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or promotional sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your particular situation. You should always consult with a medical professional before beginning
any exercise program.



The contents of this e-book are not intended for the treatment or prevention of any disease or medical
condition, nor as a substitute for medical treatment, nor as an alternative to medical advice. The author is not
a licensed healthcare provider or a registered dietitian. Utilizing the information within this e-book is at the
sole choice and risk of the reader. If you engage in this exercise program, you agree that you do so at your own
risk, are voluntarily participating in these activities, assume all risk of injury to yourself, and agree to release
and discharge the publisher and the author from any and all claims or causes of action, known or unknown,
arising out of the contents of this book.



The author advises you to take full responsibility for your safety and to know your limits. Before practicing the
skills described in this book, be sure that your equipment is well maintained and do not take risks beyond your
level of experience, aptitude, training, and comfort level.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
      Welcome to The Bodybuilding
  1   Transformation System



  2   The Transformation Principles



 16   Understanding The Program



 18   Exercise Substitutions


      What’s New in the Bodybuilding
 20   Transformation System?



 26   Suggested Training Gear



 29   Progress Tracking



 32   Muscle Anatomy



 40   Bodybuilding Nutrition



 45   Bodybuilding Supplements



 47   FAQ



 53   Comments from Jeff



 54   References
Welcome to The
Bodybuilding
Transformation
System
I want to start things off by saying thank you for
purchasing the Bodybuilding Transformation System! A
lot of time and effort went into the project that inspired
this program, and I truly appreciate your support. 




Before diving into the specifics, I want to cover the
fundamental principles that should guide any
bodybuilding program. If you've recently completed either
of my Pure Bodybuilding programs, this will be familiar
territory, so feel free to skip ahead to What’s New in the
Bodybuilding Transformation System. However, if you
haven’t run those programs—or if it’s been a while—I
highly recommend reading this section, as it highlights
the key pillars of an effective bodybuilding program.





                                                             The Bodybuilding Transformation System   1
The Transformation
    Principles




         The Bodybuilding Transformation System   2
In this handbook, you will find simple summaries of the most important factors for building muscle. As we


progress through the program, we’ll be putting these 6 key principles to use.




1 .   T e n s i o n   o v e r   e v e r y t h i n g






Tension remains undisputed as the main driver of


hypertrophy [1]. Without tension, very little muscle


growth can occur. Tension is the force created


within a muscle as it is pulled and stretched during


lifting, kind of like a rope in a tug of war.






When the muscle senses tension, a bunch of


anabolic signals are sent, telling the muscle it needs


to get bigger.






So how do we maximize tension on a muscle?


Answering that question leads us into the remaining


5 principles:







2 .   T e c h n i q u e






In order to ensure that tension is being applied to


the muscle, we need to perform exercises with good


and consistent technique. There are detailed videos


demonstrating proper technique for every exercise


included in the program sheets but, for now, here are


a few important things we’ll be focusing on:




The Negative






A controlled, slightly slower negative is a pillar of good technique. I was at the gym today, looked around, and


noticed how many people just let the weight fall during the negative. Most people seem much more concerned


with “getting the weight up” than they are with lowering it back down under control. This is significant because


getting the weight up is most likely less important than lowering it back down. Research indicates that the


eccentric (negative) phase is more important for hypertrophy than the concentric (positive) phase of a lift. So,


if you’re one of those people who tends to just let the weight free fall on the negative, in this program, really


focus on resisting the weight on its way down.






                                                               The Bodybuilding Transformation System           3
Generally speaking, we’ll be using a 2-4 second negative on most exercises. That’s a fairly slow negative
compared to what most people do, but it’s not super slow. New research on rep tempo suggests that: “the
most favorable [tempo for muscle hypertrophy] is a combination of slower eccentric movements, paired with
faster concentric movements” [2]. In other words, on most exercises, we’ll be moving the weight slower on the
negative and more explosively on the positive. A few exercises, such as cable reverse flyes for the rear delts
and cable triceps kickbacks, don’t lend themselves as well to an explosive positive, so on these, we’ll use a
smoother positive. If you’re confused about what your tempo should look like for each exercise, pay attention
to my rep tempo in the video demos for each exercise. A safe general assumption, though, would be a 2-4
second negative and a forceful positive. 


Another good cue I like to think about on the negative is treating it as if it were a “failed positive.” On every rep,
you’re not just lowering the weight, you’re resisting it. It’s kind of like you’re trying to push the weight up, but it
still keeps moving down against your might. The idea is to really feel the muscle streeettttchhhhhhhh as you
lower the weight back down. This will create much more eccentric tension than just allowing the weight to free
fall.


The Range of Motion


More and more research is pointing toward the idea that full range of motion isn’t always better per se, but
rather getting to the deepest, most-stretched aspect of the range of motion is what really matters [3]. In other
words, the stretch is, for the most part, more important than the squeeze. The bottom half of a squat is more
important than the top half of a squat. The bottom half of a cable curl is more important than the top half of a
cable curl. You need to get the muscle stretched while lifting. When performing the exercises in this program,
regularly ask yourself if you’re getting a deep stretch at the bottom. If not, you may be missing out on some
gains!


Momentum


Another thing I’ve been noticing a lot at the gym is that most people do quite a lot of cheating on their form –
too much cheating. Again, it seems as if they just want to get the weight up. It’s as if the lifters are thinking
that as long as they can get the weight from A to B, it’s mission accomplished. The problem, though, is that
you can get the weight from A to B without actually applying much tension to the target muscle. Take bicep
curls, for example. If I “curl” the weight up while leaning forward and backward (see: Bro Jeff), I’m most
definitely taking loads of tension away from the biceps and dispersing it onto the lower back. This isn’t ideal.
On each exercise, we want to always be in control of the weight. This generally means minimizing momentum
and swinging while keeping our target muscle in mind.


Form Consistency


Another point worth mentioning is that you should do your absolute best to keep your form consistent from
week to week. As you add weight or reps, it will be tempting to alter your form for the sake of “progression.”
This is a kind of fake progression though. If you just got other muscles involved by cheating the weight up, you
didn’t actually apply any additional tension to the target muscle. It’s better to keep the form in check than
increase the weight at all costs. We’re putting technique over weight in this program… always.




                                                                The Bodybuilding Transformation System            4
3 . E F F O R T



You need to push sets hard to maximize muscle growth. And, unfortunately, research consistently shows that
most people simply don’t push sets hard enough to do that [4]. It’s common to see people at the gym going
year after year but making no noticeable progress. In most cases, this isn’t because they’ve maxed out their
natural muscular potential. Rather, it’s because they simply aren’t pushing their sets close enough to failure to
stimulate new hypertrophy. Beyond the beginner stage, triggering muscle growth will be uncomfortable. You
can’t just go through the motions. You need to really grind some reps out. Of course, “just showing up” to the
gym will reap all kinds of wonderful mental health benefits, may increase strength, improve metabolic health,
and prevent muscle wasting. That’s great, but this is a bodybuilding program and “just showing up” won’t be
enough to build new tissue. For that, you need to really make the muscle work. And it needs to be hard.



So how hard is hard enough? The answer to that question isn’t black-and-white because, to some extent, it
depends on the specific exercise you’re doing and how much volume you’re doing. But one more-or-less fool-
proof way to ensure that you’re training hard enough is to push most sets either to failure or about one rep shy
of failure. In fact, a new meta-analysis suggested that as one gets closer to failure, one tends to see more
hypertrophy [5]. This trend can be seen in the figure below, where there is a clear increase in growth as you get
closer and closer to 0 reps in reserve (0 RIR).

                                                                                                                                 Some people are using this study as definitive
                                                                                                                                 proof that failure training is king, and I can
                                                      1.5                                                                        sympathize with why. The results look quite
                                                                                                                                 convincing. However, a little context is
                                                                                                                                 necessary before jumping to conclusions. Just
                                                      1.2                                                                        as one example, this other meta-analysis of 15
Standardized Mean Change in Muscle Size (Hedge’s g)




                                                                                                                                 studies on failure vs non-failure training came
                                                                                                                                 to a different conclusion: “There is no evidence
                                                      0.9
                                                                                                                                 to support that resistance training performed to
                                                                                                                                 momentary muscular failure is superior to non-
                                                      0.6
                                                                                                                                 failure resistance training for muscle
                                                                                                                                 hypertrophy” [6].



                                                      0.3                                                                        What’s going on here? It seems that depending
                                                                                                                                 on how you run the statistics, you can either
                                                                                                                                 walk away from the current body of literature
                                                      0.0                                                                        concluding that going all the way to failure
                                                                                                                                 really is better for muscle growth, OR that going
                                                                                                                                 all the way to failure doesn’t actually offer a
                                                      -0.3                                                                       meaningful benefit over stopping a few reps
                                                                                                                                 shy.

                                                      -0.6
                                                             0   2   4   6     8     10    12     14    16      18   20   22
                                                                         Estimated Proximity to Failure (RIR)



Reps in reserve (RIR) and muscle size according to Robinson et al, 2023




                                                                                                                               The Bodybuilding Transformation System        5
The evidence on failure is mixed and conflicting. So, practically speaking, what should we do?



Let’s see what experts and high-level bodybuilding coaches are saying.



You’ll hear two main lines of reasoning from experts in this area.



One camp argues against failure. They say that going to failure often isn’t worth it because it limits the amount
of volume you can do. Failure training is very fatiguing and imposes a greater recovery demand. Because of
this, if you constantly go to failure, you simply won’t be able to recover from as much volume as if you left a
rep or two in the tank. Also, studies do consistently show that volume matters for muscle growth, up to a
point. All else being equal, increasing volume usually increases muscle growth, up to a point [7, 8]. If the
research on failure is mixed, but the research on volume is clearly positive, it seems that maybe we should
prioritize volume over failure after all.



Hmmmm...



Another camp of experts would dispute this. They would argue that, sure, volume does matter, but failure
matters more. It’s better to push your sets to failure and let the volume naturally land at a level that allows you
to still recover. In other words, rather than letting volume be the driver, let intensity (effort) be the driver. Don’t
sacrifice intensity for volume, they would say.



There isn’t any real universal consensus amongst experts either.



So where does this leave us?



Well, this program offers at least one potential solution that gets the best of both worlds. The philosophy we’ll
be using around failure in this program is explained below.



The fact that there is high-quality evidence showing that failure is substantially better than non-failure training
for muscle growth, we’d better make sure we have at least some failure training in our program. If we never
ever go to failure, we’d almost certainly be leaving gains on the table. But, does this mean every single set
must be all the way to failure? I don’t think so. I think there’s also some merit to the argument that too much
failure training can impair volume tolerance. Too much failure training may also impose an unnecessary injury
risk, especially on certain exercises. So here’s the solution:



We’re going to break down all of our working sets into “Early Sets” and “Last Sets”. Early Sets refer to every
working set other than the very last set.



If an exercise calls for 3 sets, sets 1 and 2 are the Early Sets and set 3 is the Last Set. If an exercise calls for 4
sets, sets 1, 2 and 3 would be the Early Sets and set 4 would be the Last Set. If an exercise calls for 2 sets, set
1 would be the Early Set and set 2 would be the Last Set. If an exercise calls for 1 set, you’ll see that there is
no Early Set RPE listed, as the first set will also be the last set, so just follow the Last Set RPE. It’s worth
mentioning that Early Sets are NOT warm-up sets. Warm-up sets are separate and to be done before the Early
Sets. Dividing working sets into Early Sets and Last Sets is simply a way for us to apply different intensity
levels to different working sets.





                                                                The Bodybuilding Transformation System             6
Here’s how that will look in practice.



For the Early Sets, we’ll generally avoid going all the way to failure, usually stopping with ~1-2 rep left in the
tank. In the program, I’ll refer to this as an RPE of ~8-9, which simply means that you didn’t quite get all the
way to failure and you might have had 1-2 more reps in the tank, but certainly no more than that. 



In case anyone is confused, let me back-up and explain RPE in a little more detail. Here’s a very quick primer
on RPE.



RPE stands for Rating of Perceived Exertion. It may sound fancy, but it’s extremely simple once we break the
acronym down. RPE is your rating of how you perceived your exertion on a set. In other words, you rate how
hard the set felt on the scale of 1-10, and that’s your RPE. Usually, to make the scale a bit more objective,
coaches will set up the RPE scale based on how many reps you think you had left in the tank. For example, if
you think you had 0 reps left in the tank, that would correspond to an RPE of 10. If you think you had 1 rep left
in the tank, that would correspond to an RPE 9. And so on down the line. I’ll break it down in more detail in the
table below. Even if you’re very familiar with RPE, I’d recommend reading through the table as some of the
information is unique to this program.


    RPE                                                  Meaning

     10            You reached failure. You actually tried and failed to get the weight all the way up.


    9-10           You didn’t actually reach failure, but you were very close. You might have been able to
                   add a little more weight, but you definitely didn’t leave more than 1 rep in the tank.

      9            You could’ve done one more rep if you really tried. This is still a hard set.


    8-9            You could’ve done 1 or 2 more reps if you really tried. It wasn’t a brutal set, but you’re
                   still pretty close to failure here.

                   You probably had 2 reps left in the tank. It wasn’t a super hard set, but will still
      8
                   certainly stimulate hypertrophy.

    7-8            There are 2 or 3 reps in the tank here. Depending on the exercise, this is usually not
                   going to feel like a truly hard set.

                   You have 3 reps left in the tank. On most exercises, this would feel like something
      7
                   between a tough warm up set and an easy working set.

    6-7            You have 3 or maybe 4 reps left in the tank.



                                                                The Bodybuilding Transformation System           7
    RPE                                                    Meaning

     6             You could’ve done 4 more if you really tried.


     5             You could’ve done 5 more if you really tried.

    1-4            More than 5 reps left in the tank. These are warm-up sets, not working sets.


For this program, the last set of every exercise will be taken to failure. 


You may also notice that in the program I use a “~” sign before most RPE ratings to imply that your RPE
estimates will never be perfectly accurate. This sign denotes that being off by about 1 RPE unit is totally
normal. Just do your best to be within +/- 1 RPE of the assigned RPE. Also, you can use the Last Set of most
exercises to see how accurate you were with your Early Set RPEs by sending it all the way to failure and
comparing it to how many reps you got for the previous sets.


4 . P r o g r e s s i v e o v e r l o a d


The simplest explanation of progressive overload is
when you increase some training variable over time.
It’s widely accepted that progressive overload is
crucial for ensuring continued progress because you
need to continually provide the muscle with a new
stimulus to adapt to. Without overload, the muscle
will reach the current challenge level and have no
real reason to continue growing. 


There are a large number of ways to apply
progressive overload. Here are the main ones we’ll
be emphasizing in this program:






                                                                 The Bodybuilding Transformation System   8
Adding reps                     This will be the main method of overload on exercises that give a rep range,
                                instead of a fixed rep count. For example, if the program calls for 2 sets of 10-12
                                reps on Cable Crunches (as it does), you’ll pick a weight that will sufficiently
                                challenge you for either 10, 11, or 12 reps. Let’s say you get 10 reps on both sets
                                in Week 3. In Week 4, you will try to add a rep to at least one of those sets. Over
                                the coming few weeks, try to max out the rep range by getting 12 reps on both
                                sets. Only once you’ve maxed out the rep range you should add some weight and
                                then reduce reps back down to the bottom of the range. Coaches refer to this as
                                double progression since we are progressing both reps and weight, in that order.
Adding weight
                  For all exercises within the program, only add weight once you’ve maxed out the
                                top end of the rep range, as explained above.
Improving form                  Even if you can’t add some reps or weight during a given week, you can always do
                                minor things to improve your technique. Improvements in technique cues,
                                especially improvements in controlling the negative, can increase tension on the
                                target muscle and totally counts as progressive overload!
Improving the mind-             If you can’t add reps or weight, you can focus on feeling the muscle working
muscle connection               better. Improving the mind-muscle connection is most likely not as effective as
                                adding reps, weight or improving form at increasing tension, but research has
                                shown that the mind-muscle connection can increase hypertrophy in some cases
                                [9]. It’s certainly worth keeping in mind as an overload option, especially on
                                isolation exercises where adding reps and weight may become impractical at a
                                certain point of strength development.


5 . H i g h - T e n s i o n E x e r c i s e s


You’ll quickly notice that this program is not a powerbuilding/strength program. There are many machine-
based and cable-based exercises and only a select few free-weight movements. Even the over-hated and
under-appreciated Smith Machine makes a number of appearances over a free weight barbell option (gasp!).


Why is this?


Well, first of all, the best evidence shows that machines are at least equally effective as free weights in
stimulating hypertrophy [10], and in some cases, may be superior [11].


That shouldn’t be surprising as machines and cables have a few clear advantages to free weights when it
comes to bodybuilding. Here’s a short list of a few:






                                                                The Bodybuilding Transformation System         9
Generally, you can push sets to failure more safely on
machines. If you fail a rep on a machine, the weight is
usually safely supported by the machine after you fail
a rep. On the other hand, if you fail with free weights,
there is less support for the failed attempt, which may
come with a higher risk of injury.



Good machines are also generally designed to have
good resistance profiles. Free weight exercises tend
to have much more variable resistance profiles,
meaning that the exercise may feel very hard at one
point in the range of motion, but very easy at another
point in the range of motion. Machines tend to apply
resistance more evenly, which is a good thing
because as you approach failure, the muscle won’t fail
just because it hit a tough spot in the free weight’s
resistance profile. Instead, it’ll be because the muscle
has reached exhaustion. Let’s compare the standing
dumbbell curl versus the Bayesian cable curl, for
example. With the dumbbell curl, your biceps
experience the highest level of tension when the
elbow is at 90 degrees and virtually zero tension when
the bicep is fully stretched at the bottom. Wouldn’t it
be nice if there was a way to keep even tension on the
biceps throughout the entire range of motion? Luckily,
there is a way! It’s called a Bayesian cable curl. Unlike
dumbbells, cables offer much more continuous
tension on the biceps throughout the entire range of
motion.

Machines also tend to offer higher stability than free weight exercises. Unstable exercises are not ideal for
hypertrophy. Think about doing a squat on a Bosu ball. You’re so challenged with trying to keep your
balance that you aren’t able to properly apply tension to the quads. Increasing the stability of an exercise,
generally speaking, increases the efficiency of the force transfer to the target muscle. This is why, for
hypertrophy purposes, getting “locked in” on an exercise is smart. The less locked in you are, the more
opportunities there are for tension to leak – which is not great. Since machines usually offer very high
stability, there is minimal leakage of tension.



Machines also generally require fewer warm-up sets. This means you can get to your working sets faster
without wasting time and energy doing as many non-stimulative warm up sets. For example, when I do
barbell back squats, I usually need to do 4-5 warm-up sets before I feel ready to hit my first working set.
However, on Hack Squats or Smith Machine Squats, I feel ready to tackle my working sets after only 2-3
warm-up sets. That means less time and energy spent doing work that isn’t helping with muscle growth
and more time and energy spent on the good stuff.




                                                            The Bodybuilding Transformation System      10
Despite these advantages, I don’t want to overstate the supremacy of machine-based exercises. Remember
that research indicates that both machines and free weights are effective for building muscle. And free
weights have advantages too. They’re more accessible, they tend to have better strength carryover, they may
activate smaller stabilizers better, and they’re more versatile (you can do a lot more exercises with a barbell
than you can with a hack squat).



But when it comes to our main goal with this program specifically, which is to build muscle, I do believe that
machines have a slight edge in most instances. That said, free weight exercises are still included throughout
the program. But overall, you will notice that machines and cables are emphasized. 



However, just in case you don’t have access to machines and cables, for every exercise, I’ve included at least
one free weight substitution option. Making these substitutions will absolutely allow you to still get the job
done and make great gains while running this program with minimal equipment. 



Beyond an emphasis on exercises that have high stability and good tension profiles, this program also
prioritizes exercises with a long length muscle bias. This means we’ll be focusing on exercises that load the
muscle while it is being stretched. Examples of very long-length biased exercises include Bayesian cable curl,
DB Bulgarian split squat, pendlay deficit row, and bottom-half DB flyes.







6 . I n t e n s i t y T e c h n i q u e s



Intensity techniques are also a big part of this program. In fact, there is a full column in the program dedicated
to the intensity technique we’ll be using on the last set of each exercise.






                                                             The Bodybuilding Transformation System          11
Here’s a list of the ones we’ll be using:



Failure




As mentioned before, we will be taking the last set of every exercise to failure (except during the intro/deload
weeks). This means that you attempted and failed to get the weight all the way up. I like this approach for a
few reasons:



    It reinforces what "all out" truly means, helping you better estimate sub-maximal RPEs.




    It standardizes effort scientifically. Instead of relying on subjective estimates (i.e., RPEs below 10), this
    ensures you're training with the intended effort.




    Given the mixed evidence on the benefits of training to failure, I'd rather err on the side of pushing to
    failure.




Long-Length Partials (LLPs)




A lengthened partial is simply a partial rep in the stretched aspect of the lift. For example, if we’re doing
lengthened partials on pendlay deficit rows we would come about half way up, doing partial reps in the bottom
part of the row.




                                                               The Bodybuilding Transformation System           12
As another example, if we’re doing lengthened partials on a seated leg curl, we would do partial reps in the top
half of the curl, where the leg is more straight rather than more bent.




More and more research is showing that the stretched/lengthened aspect of the lift is better for hypertrophy
than the squeezed/shortened aspect of the lift [3]. Lengthened partials allow us to spend more time in the
most hypertrophic aspect of the range of motion.


    IMPORTANT! Lengthened partials are used in a variety of ways within this program. Most often, exercises will use
    lengthened partials to extend the last set of the exercise beyond failure. For example, for Seated Leg Curls in Week
    2, immediately after reaching the failure with a full range of motion, you’ll then switch to lengthened partials and
    continue to failure again. You’ll also find some exercises with a prefix of “bottom-half”, like the “Bottom-Half DB
    Flye”. This indicates that all reps and sets are to be performed as lengthened partials.





                                                                   The Bodybuilding Transformation System              13
Static Stretches





Static stretching is when you hold a stretch in a fixed position. In this program, we’ll be holding specific

stretches for certain muscles after the last set of an exercise. For example, in Week 2, after finishing 2 sets of

6-8 reps on standing calf raises, we’ll hold a 30 second static stretch for each calf, like so:




This 2019 study and this 2022 study both found that inter-set stretching can enhance muscle growth for the

quads and calves, respectively [12, 13]. This makes sense, given what we know about the value of the stretch

for inducing hypertrophy. However, research is mixed in this area. Not all studies show a benefit for muscle

growth. For example, this 2023 study found no benefit of inter-set stretching on bicep growth [14]. Looking at

the research broadly, I suspect the effect of stretching is likely muscle specific. The studies that do show an

effect found a benefit in the quads and calves, and we’ll be focusing on static stretching for just the calves in

this program.





Oh, and don’t worry – we’re only static stretching after the last set of an exercise. By doing so, you won’t need

to worry about it negatively impacting your performance. Besides, research shows that static stretching only

seems to hurt performance when you hold the stretch for longer than 60 seconds [15]. The 30 second holds

we’ll be doing are well within the safe zone.




                                                               The Bodybuilding Transformation System          14
Myo-reps




Myo-reps are when you extend a set beyond failure by taking short mini-rests and cranking out a few extra
reps in between mini-rests. For example, this is how we’ll be using myo-reps on the cable crunch in this
program:

 

When the program calls for “Leg Extensions 2 sets of 10-12 reps (+ Myo-reps)”



     Do sets 1 as normal




     On set 2: do 10-12 reps (reach failure)




     Then rest for ~5 seconds




     Do another 3-4 reps




     Then rest for another ~5 seconds




     Do another 3-4 reps




     Repeat until you can no longer get at least 3 reps




     At this point, the set is finished




Myo-reps are great because they allow you to squeeze out some extra reps while the muscle is near full
exhaustion. The reps close to the end of a set are more “effective” for muscle growth than reps toward the
beginning of a set. Myo-reps allow us to get in more of these “effective reps”.






                                                              The Bodybuilding Transformation System       15
Understanding
 The Program


       The Bodybuilding Transformation System   16
The program is laid out in a PDF and an Excel spreadsheet. Below is a brief explanation of what each column
in the program means.




           1           2   3                      4           5         6         7                     8




1.   Each exercise has a clickable demo link.




2.   Intensity techniques to be done after the last set only.




3.   Warm-up sets should be light and easy.




4.   Record the weight you used for each set here.




5.   Early set RPEs are often a touch lower than last set RPE. See handbook for an explanation of RPE.




6.   Rough guidelines for how long to rest between sets.




7.   Two substitution options for each exercise. If you can't do the exercise listed feel free to swap it for either 

     one of these.




8.   Here you will find exercise-specific coaching cues. Always read the notes before doing your warm-up sets 

     so you can practice any new cues.




                                                                  The Bodybuilding Transformation System          17
  Exercise
Substitutions



       The Bodybuilding Transformation System   18
For each exercise, there are two alternative substitution options given. Here is a list of suitable reasons for

making a substitution:





   You don’t have access to the main exercise






   The main exercise causes you pain






   You really dislike the main exercise (but love one of the substitutions)






   You just don’t “feel” the main exercise working at all, even after giving it an honest shot for several weeks

   (and you do “feel” one of the substitutions really well)




Here is a list of less suitable reasons for making a substitution:




   You haven’t done the main exercise before (no better time than now to learn! Watch the exercise demo and

   give it a shot!)






   Someone at your gym is using the main exercise (instead of swapping, move onto a different exercise and

   come back to it later. If it’s still unavailable and that’s derailing your workout, then you can feel free to make

   the swap).






   The main exercise is harder than one of the subs. Don’t be tempted to always go for the easiest exercise

   option! Your hard work will pay off.




You can substitute either Option 1 or Option 2. They aren’t arranged so that Option 1 is necessarily better than

Option 2. They are just different options!




                                                               The Bodybuilding Transformation System           19
What’s New in the
  Bodybuilding
Transformation
    System?

         The Bodybuilding Transformation System   20
T h e B e s t T r a i n i n g S p l i t



This program follows an Upper/Lower/Pull/Push/Legs split. While there are plenty of effective training splits,
this one is my personal favorite.


Why 5x Per Week?



I find that training five days per week strikes the ideal balance between volume and recovery. A 4x per week
split can make it tough for intermediate-advanced lifters to fit in enough volume without extending workouts
well beyond an hour. On the other hand, a 6x per week split allows for more volume but can be harder to stick
to and only provides one full rest day.





Choosing the Right 5x Split



Even within a 5x per week framework, there are several common options:



   Upper/Lower/Upper/Lower/Upper



   Full Body 5x



   Chest/Back/Shoulders/Arms/Legs (Bro Split)

To narrow it down, research suggests that training muscle groups twice per week is beneficial once volume
exceeds ~6–8 sets per session. That makes once-per-week splits (like the Bro Split) less effective for
intermediate-advanced lifters, eliminating it from consideration.



At the other extreme, the Full Body 5x split can be a fun change of pace but tends to be more taxing than other
splits, making it better suited for advanced lifters.



That leaves us with Upper/Lower/Upper/Lower/Upper and Upper/Lower/Pull/Push/Legs. While they hit upper
and lower body equally, breaking two Upper sessions into Pull and Push days makes each workout feel
distinct and more engaging. There’s a reason the Bro Split remains popular—focusing on specific muscle
groups is fun. While Pull/Push workouts aren’t quite as isolated, they provide a similar satisfaction without
sacrificing training volume.





                                                            The Bodybuilding Transformation System        21
Pull/Push/Legs vs. Push/Pull/Legs






You might be wondering why I chose Pull/Push/Legs instead of Push/Pull/Legs. Honestly, this is personal

preference—I find my chest and shoulders benefit more from an extra day of recovery compared to my back. If

you prefer to swap them, go for it!





                           Week Day                                            Workout



                            Monday                                      Upper (Strength Focus)



                            Tuesday                                     Lower (Strength Focus)



                          Wednesday                                              Rest



                            Thursday                                   Pull (Hypertrophy Focus)




                                Friday                                Push (Hypertrophy Focus)




                            Saturday                                  Legs (Hypertrophy Focus)




                                Sunday                                           Rest




Training        B l o c k s






This program is divided into two training blocks: the Foundation Block and the Ramping Block. The Foundation

Block lasts 5 weeks, while the Ramping Block lasts 7 weeks. Both blocks share the same overarching goal—

maximum hypertrophy—but differ in two key ways.




1. Exercise Selection






Most exercises will change between blocks. To account for this, both blocks begin with an intro/deload week,

allowing you to familiarize yourself with the new exercises and rep ranges before increasing volume and

intensity.







2. Training Volume






The Foundation Block maintains a consistent volume after its intro week. This establishes a baseline to build

from in the Ramping Block while encouraging meticulous tracking of performance (e.g., weights, RPE).






In the Ramping Block, volume progressively increases after the intro week.






                                                            The Bodybuilding Transformation System        22
                Weeks 7–8: Volume increases from the Foundation Block baseline.

                Weeks 9–10: Volume increases again.


                Weeks 11–12: One final volume increase.


This approach is inspired by a brand-new study by Enes et al., which compared three groups of female lifters:



1.

 Constant volume group: Performed 22 sets per week for quads throughout the entire 12-week study.



2.


 Moderate ramp group: Started at 16 sets per week and increased by 2 sets every two weeks, finishing at 26
      sets per week.



3. Aggressive ramp group: Started at 18 sets per week and increased by 4 sets every two weeks, finishing at
   38 sets per week.

  The study found that the groups who increased volume over time made the greatest gains in both muscle size
  and strength. What’s especially interesting is that the group that ended at 26 sets per week averaged just 21
  sets per week across the entire program—one set fewer than the constant volume group, yet still achieved
  superior results.

   

  This lends support to the idea that progressively increasing training volume over time may be more effective
  than keeping it static—even when the average volume is similar.


                 Weekly Training Volume

                 125



                 100
Volume (sets)




                  75



                  50



                  25



                   0
                       Week 1   Week 2   Week 3   Week 4   Week 5   Week 6    Week 7   Week 8   Week 9   Week 10   Week 11   Week 12




                                                                             The Bodybuilding Transformation System             23
Seamless Progression


Since I ran this program for a full year, I designed it to loop back seamlessly. After completing Week 12, you
can jump right back into Week 1, which serves as a deload.



L o n g M u s c l e L e n g t h F o c u s



This program follows an Upper/Lower/Pull/Push/Legs split. While there are plenty of effective training splits,
this one is my personal favorite.


Although I briefly discussed training at long muscle lengths within The 6 Fundamental Bodybuilding Principles
section, that was mostly specific to lengthened partials, where you’re performing the exercise with a restricted
range of motion to emphasize the aspect of the lift where the muscle is most stretched. Since my last
program launched in Fall of 2023, I co-authored a paper that outlined optimal resistance training techniques.
We concluded, based on the literature, that overall exercise selection should be biased towards movements
that place tension on the muscle in its most stretched position. So, for this program, a particular focus has
been placed on movements that achieve this.


Examples:




Pendlay Deficit Row                           High-Cable Lateral Raise            Smith Machine Static Lunge w/
                                                                                  Elevated Front Foot




DB Bulgarian Split Squat                      Overhead Cable Triceps Extension    45° Hyperextension




1-Arm 45° Cable Rear Delt Flye

                                                                   The Bodybuilding Transformation System   24
Fa i l u r e   T r a i n i n g






While my recent bodybuilding programs have emphasized training to failure, this program takes it a step

further—every exercise goes to failure on the last set. There are several reasons for this, which I touched on

earlier, but I’ll reiterate them here:




   It reinforces what "all out" truly means, helping you better estimate sub-maximal RPEs.





   It standardizes effort scientifically. Instead of relying on subjective estimates (i.e., RPEs below 10), this

   ensures you're training with the intended effort.





   Given the mixed evidence on the benefits of training to failure, I'd rather err on the side of pushing to

   failure.




M e t i c u lo u s     T r ac k i n g   o f   W e i g hts   ( D O   T H I S )






In the past, I’ve been a bit more relaxed with tracking my weights. I’d focus on strength progression for a few

key compound lifts while relying on effort and intensity for the rest. But for this project, I committed to tracking

everything—and after a year of doing so, I have to say, it makes a big difference.






Having this feedback, even on smaller movements, can be a great motivator when things are going well. And

when progress stalls, it’s a clear signal that something might need adjusting. You can absolutely make great

progress without tracking everything, but I encourage you to give it a shot.





                                                                              The Bodybuilding Transformation System   25
 Suggested

Training Gear




       The Bodybuilding Transformation System   26
In the table below, you will find a list of training gear that can help you make the most out of this program.
None of this training gear is required and there is a level of importance column that will help you decide which
items you may want to consider more than others.

                                                                                                  Recommended

    Please note that all of the Amazon links and Rise links below are affiliate
    links. I will get a small commission if you purchase any items from these
    links. While I greatly appreciate that support, I want to emphasize that
    these are all supplemental items and are absolutely not needed in order to
    make great progress while running this program. That said, I personally use
    all of the items on the list and I do find they make a difference (some more
    than others). If you only get two items on this list, I would get liquid chalk
    and lifting straps over anything else.
                                                                                                  LARA STAR Pull Up
               As an                   I earn from qualifying purchases.                          Handles Grips...
                                                                                                         Shop Now




                                                                                       Level of          Exercises to
      Gear               Link                          Why
                                                                                     importance            use on

   Angles 90             Link           Allow for more secure grip              Low-Moderate          Lat focused
    Handles                             and better mind-muscle                                        pulldowns and
                                        connection on pulling                                         lat-focused rows
                                        exercises.



                                        A regular D-handle can be
                                        used without issue.

  Liquid Chalk           Link           Prevent grip slipping from              Moderate-high         Any exercise that
                                        sweaty palms. Usually allows                                  relies on grip
                                        for more reps and/or                                          strength (usually
                                        increased load.                                               pulling exercises
                                                                                                      like rows, pullups,
                                                                                                      RDLs, etc.)

     Straps              Link           Prevents grip from being a              Moderate-high         Most back
                                        limiting factor on heavy pulls,                               exercises and
                                        allowing you to overload the                                  RDLs
                                        target muscles better.




                                                                    The Bodybuilding Transformation System            27
                                                             Level of          Exercises to
    Gear         Link               Why
                                                           importance            use on

Knee Sleeves     Link   Knee sleeves provide comfort        Moderate        Squat-type
                        and cushioning around the                           movements and
                        knees during squat-type                             leg presses
                        movements and offer a small
                        performance boost.


Bodybuilding     Link   Belts are more helpful for          Moderate        Squat-type
    Belt                strength/powerlifting training                      exercises and
                        but can still help with bracing                     RDLs. Some find it
                        on some compound                                    helpful on
                        exercises in this program. A                        presses.
                        thicker powerlifting-style
                        lever belt can be used if it’s
                        comfortable for you.

  Wrist Cuffs    Link   These will be used for cuffed       Moderate        High-cable cuffed
                        lateral raises throughout the                       lateral raises,
                        program. The cuffs will                             cable hip
                        prevent your forearms from                          abductions, cable
                        taking over on lateral raises                       hip adductions
                        and often helps improve the
                        mind-muscle connection.
                        They can also be used to do
                        cable hip ab/adductions.


Lacrosse Balls   Link   Holding onto two lacrosse         Low (personal     High-cable cuffed
                        balls during cuffed lateral        preference)      lateral raises
                        raises can improve tactile
                        sensation and for some
                        people makes the movement
                        feel better than having your
                        hands floating with nothing
                        to hold onto.




                                                The Bodybuilding Transformation System     28
Progress

Tracking




    The Bodybuilding Transformation System   29
There are 3 main tools we’ll be using to track progress on our bodybuilding journey: strength performance,
progress photos, and bodyweight.




1 . S t r e n g t h p e r f o r m a n c e ( p r o g r e s s i v e o v e r lo a d )


The single best indicator that you’re gaining muscle is if you’re gaining strength in the gym. This doesn’t mean
your 1 rep max strength, but rather your strength within the rep ranges given in the program (usually around
8-15 reps). If you are either lifting more weight or doing more reps at the same weight within the rep ranges
given in the program, you’re most likely adding muscle. This is why it’s really important that you track your
weight and reps used for as many exercises as possible while running the program. Not only will tracking your
performance keep you accountable to “beat the logbook,” it will serve as a reliable proxy for physique progress
(which can be harder to gauge visually, especially as you get more advanced).




2 . P r o g r e s s p h ot o s


Since getting more jacked is the goal, progress photos will be the most direct method of measuring progress.
However, depending on your level of advancement, you may not notice visual progress in photos as easily or
quickly as you will strength progress in the gym. For this reason, I suggest taking progress roughly once every
2-3 months and ideally no more than once a week.


When taking progress photos, ensure that you use the same camera, background and lighting whenever
possible. Remember to take at least one photo from the front, side and rear.





                                                                      The Bodybuilding Transformation System   30
3 . B o d y w e i g h t



Bodyweight is a surprisingly useful tool for tracking progress when used in combination with the other two. On
its own, it can be deceptive because it doesn’t tell you if you’re gaining weight from fat, water, or muscle.
However, when used alongside the other two tools, some common sense reasoning can give you a very good
idea of what type of tissue you’re gaining. For example, if you’re getting stronger, you’re looking more jacked in
your photos, and your bodyweight is increasing at an appropriate rate, you can rest assured that the weight
you’re gaining is muscle. However, if you aren’t getting stronger, you’re looking significantly softer/flatter in
your pics, and your weight is increasing rapidly, then you’re most likely gaining fat.



Gaining roughly 1-2% of your bodyweight per month will ensure that you are gaining mostly muscle. For
example, if you currently weigh 170 lbs (77 kg), gaining ~1.7-3.4 lbs (0.7-1.5 kg) per month will ensure that
most will be lean mass. Generally speaking, the slower you gain, the leaner it will be. 



If you have simultaneous fat loss goals while running this program, you will need to be either in a caloric
deficit or at caloric maintenance. Generally speaking, for fat loss, I suggest losing weight no faster than 0.5-1%
of your bodyweight per week. For example, if you currently weigh 220 lbs (100 kg), as you cut, aim to lose
1.1-2.2 lbs (0.5-1 kg) per week to retain as much muscle as possible. If your goal is body recomposition, aim
to roughly maintain your body weight while using progress photos and strength gain as your main guide for
progress.



While tracking your weight, be careful not to get too consumed with individual weigh-ins. Single weigh-ins can
be impacted by water fluctuations, digestion changes, sleep disruptions, how late you ate the night before and
a number of other short-term factors. Instead, observe weekly trends. If you take more than one weigh in per
week, get the weekly average and compare weekly averages for a more accurate representation of how your
weight is trending.



There is a much more detailed explanation of body recomposition in my nutrition guide on the topic.



While other tools for tracking body composition such as calipers, DEXA scans and other bodyfat testing
devices can be useful in some situations, given their low accuracy and high error margins, I generally don’t
recommend using them for tracking progress [16]. The three tools outlined above will be plenty for getting the
job done and fully informing you on whether or not you’re moving in the right direction.




                                                             The Bodybuilding Transformation System          31
Muscle Anatomy




       The Bodybuilding Transformation System   32
Below, you will find a description of how we plan on hitting each muscle in this program.


C H E S T



The chest is worked with any exercise that pushes the
arm across the body. This includes movements such as
presses, flyes, dips, and push-ups. The pecs can be split
into a clavicular (upper) head and a sternal (mid & lower
head). All exercises in this program will target both
heads. However, incline presses and closer-grip pushes
tend to emphasize the upper pecs slightly more, while
decline presses and dips tend to emphasize the mid and
lower pecs slightly more.



Here is a list of exercises we’ll be using in this program to
target the chest: 45° Incline Barbell Press, Cable
Crossover Ladder, Barbell Bench Press, Bottom-Half DB
Flye, 45° Incline DB Press, Pec Deck, Machine Chest
Press, Bottom-Half Seated Cable Flye.




                                                       L A T S



                                                       The lats are worked with any exercise that pulls the arm
                                                       down to the front or in from the side. The lats are often
                                                       one of the hardest muscles for people to “feel” which can
                                                       make them a tricky part of the back to hit. Throughout
                                                       this program, we’ll be using a variety of exercises and
                                                       cues to maximally activate the lats.



                                                       Here is a list of exercises we’ll be using in this program to
                                                       target the lats: Wide-Grip Pull-Up, Pendlay Deficit Row,
                                                       Neutral-Grip Lat Pulldown, Chest-Supported Machine Row,
                                                       Neutral-Grip Seated Cable Row, Dual-Handle Lat Pulldown,
                                                       Smith Machine Row, Lean-Back Lat Pulldown, Chest-
                                                       Supported T-Bar Row, Dual-Handle Elbows-Out Cable Row.





                                                                   The Bodybuilding Transformation System     33
M I D B A C K



The mid-back muscles, such as the mid-traps and
rhomboids, are worked with any exercise that squeezes
the shoulder blades together, like various kinds of rows
and face pulls. Given the number of muscles that make
up the mid-back, we’ll use a variety of exercises to ensure
well-rounded development.



Here is a list of exercises we’ll be using in this program
to target the mid-back: Pendlay Deficit Row, Chest-
Supported Machine Row, Neutral-Grip Seated Cable Row,
1-Arm 45° Cable Rear Delt Flye, Smith Machine Row,
Chest-Supported T-Bar Row, Dual-Handle Elbows-Out
Cable Row.





                                                     B I C E P S



                                                     The biceps are worked with any exercise that flexes
                                                     (bends) the elbow. As such, they’ll be targeted directly on
                                                     any kind of bicep curl and indirectly on most back
                                                     exercises, like vertical pulls and rows. Because the biceps
                                                     cross both the elbow joint and the shoulder joint, they can
                                                     be activated in slightly different ways by varying your arm
                                                     position. 



                                                     Here is a list of exercises we’ll be using in this program to
                                                     target the the biceps: Bayesian Cable Curl, EZ-Bar Cable
                                                     Curl, Machine Preacher Curl, Cable Rope Hammer Curl,
                                                     DB Concentration Curl.





                                                              The Bodybuilding Transformation System         34
T R I C E P S

                                          S H O U L D E R S

                                                         ( F r o n t, S i d e & R e a r D e lt o i d s )


The triceps are worked with any exercise that
extends (straightens out) the elbow. As such, they       For our purposes in this program, the shoulders can
will be targeted directly on triceps extensions,         be split into 3 different divisions: the anterior (front)
pressdowns and kickbacks, and targeted indirectly        deltoids, the lateral (side) deltoids, and the posterior
on vertical and horizontal presses. As a tiny wrinkle,   (rear) deltoids. 


the long head of the triceps will also be active to
some degree on back movements like pull-ups and          The front delts will be hit, to a very high degree, on
pullovers. Like the biceps, the triceps also cross       all horizontal and vertical pressing and as such,
both the elbow joint and the shoulder joint, meaning     won’t be getting any isolation work in this program.
varying your arm position can impact which region        The side delts will also be hit on horizontal and
of the triceps is emphasized. Because of this, we        vertical presses, but to a lesser degree. Because of
will be performing a variety of different tricep         this, we’ll be doing a variety of isolation exercises for
isolation movements; some with the arm held up           the side delts. In contrast with the other two
overhead, some with the arm positioned down by           divisions, the rear delts aren’t hit with pressing
the side, and some with the arm hyperextended            movements, but will instead be targeted on any
behind the torso.















                        horizontal and vertical pulls in the program.
                                                         However, because the larger and stronger lats and
                                                         mid-back muscles tend to take over on these
                                                         exercises, we will be isolating the rear delts as well
                                                         through the use of exercises such as 1-arm 45°
                                                         cable rear delt flyes.








                                                         Here is a list of exercises we’ll be using in this
Here is a list of exercises we’ll be using in this       program to target the shoulders: 45° Incline Barbell
program to target the triceps: Overhead Cable            Press, High-Cable Lateral Raise, Barbell Bench
Triceps Extension (Bar), Overhead Cable Triceps          Press, 1-Arm 45° Cable Rear Delt Flye, Machine
Extension (Bar), Cable Triceps Kickback, EZ-Bar          Shoulder Press, 45° Incline DB Press, Machine Chest
Skull Crusher, Triceps Pressdown (Bar).                  Press, Seated DB Shoulder Press.



                                                           The Bodybuilding Transformation System            35
U P P E R T R A P S


The biomechanical function of the upper traps is still the matter of ongoing scientific debate. Most experts
contend that the upper traps don’t actually elevate the scapula (like in a traditional shrug) because the muscle
fibers of the upper traps run much more horizontally than vertically. Instead of pulling the shoulders up, they
actually rotate the scapula up. The simple implication of this is that the traps would be better targeted by
shrugging “up and in” instead of straight up. Of course, even if this is fully true, there are still other muscles on
top of the shoulders that are responsible for shrugging the shoulders, such as the levator scapulae, and they
will still grow in response to shrugging exercises. Regardless, we will be using machine shrugs and cable
paused shrug-ins in this program as our main exercises for targeting the upper traps. However, it is worth
keeping in mind that many of the upper trap fibers will assist with horizontal rows, lateral raises, and will be
worked isometrically on Romanian deadlifts.






Here is a list of exercises we’ll be using in this program to target the upper traps: Machine Shrug, Cable
Paused Shrug-In.


     I should note that I didn’t include direct neck work in this program simply because most people aren’t interested
     in direct neck training. However, if you are interested in incorporating direct neck training into this program, I’d
     recommend watching this video for suggested exercises. Even just adding 3 sets of neck extension and 3 sets of
     neck flexion 1-2x per week should be enough to gain muscle size in your neck, if you are new to training it or
     haven’t been training it consistently.




                                                                   The Bodybuilding Transformation System               36
                                                       Q U A D S


                                                       The quads are worked with any exercise that extends
                                                       (straightens out) the knee. Three heads of the quads only
                                                       cross the knee, while one head (the rectus femoris)
                                                       crosses both the knee joint and the hip joint. Because of
                                                       this, exercises like squat variations and leg presses don’t
                                                       hit the rectus femoris as well as the other heads of the
                                                       quads. Luckily, leg extensions and sissy squats get the
                                                       pesky rectus femoris head much more involved. 


                                                       Here is a list of exercises we’ll be using in this program to
                                                       target the quads: Smith Machine Squat, Leg Extension,
                                                       Leg Press, DB Bulgarian Split Squat, Smith Machine Static
                                                       Lunge w/ Elevated Front Foot, Hack Squat, Walking
                                                       Lunge.






H A M S T R I N G S


The hamstrings are worked with any exercise that flexes
(bends) the knee and/or that extends (straights out) the
hips. Basically, we’re talking about leg curls and hip
hinges like Romanian deadlifts. Because the hamstrings
cross both the hip joint and the knee joint, similar to the
rectus femoris of the quads, the hamstrings aren’t hit
particularly well on squats or leg presses either. 


Here is a list of exercises we’ll be using in this program to
target the hamstrings: Lying Leg Curl, Barbell RDL, Seated
Leg Curl, 45° Hyperextension.





                                                                The Bodybuilding Transformation System        37
                                                       G L U T E S


                                                       The glutes are a complex web of muscles that perform
                                                       many different functions, but their main action in a
                                                       bodybuilding context is hip extension (straightening the
                                                       hips out). This means they’ll be hit on all squat variations,
                                                       leg presses, lunge and deadlift variations. The glute
                                                       medius is mainly responsible for hip abduction and will be
                                                       targeted via any direct hip abduction work in this program,
                                                       but it’ll also play a big stabilizing role on virtually every
                                                       lower body compound exercise.


                                                       Here is a list of exercises we’ll be using in this program to
                                                       target the glutes: Smith Machine Squat, Barbell RDL, Leg
                                                       Press, DB Bulgarian Split Squat, Machine Hip Abduction,
                                                       Smith Machine Static Lunge w/ Elevated Front Foot, 45°
                                                       Hyperextension, Hack Squat, Walking Lunge.






A D D U C T O R S


The adductors run down the inner thigh and are a
commonly neglected area by bodybuilders. While they
will be hit to a substantial degree on squats, the
adductors are crucial for adding mass to the lower body
from the front and back. Because of this, we’ll be
including a good deal of direct hip adduction work in this
program.


Here is a list of exercises we’ll be using in this program to
target the adductors: Smith Machine Squat, Leg Press,
Machine Hip Adduction, Hack Squat, DB Bulgarian Split
Squat, Smith Machine Static Lunge w/ Elevated Front
Foot, Walking Lunge.






                                                                The Bodybuilding Transformation System         38
                                                       C A LV E S



                                                       The calves are worked with any exercise that plantar
                                                       flexes the ankle (points the feet down like in a calf raise).
                                                       The gastrocnemius muscle of the calves crosses the
                                                       knee joint as well as the ankle joint and as such will be
                                                       indirectly targeted on leg curls where it helps out the
                                                       hamstrings. Although the calves are notoriously one of
                                                       the most stubborn muscles to grow, like any muscle they
                                                       will respond to proper hypertrophy training by growing. 



                                                       Here is a list of exercises we’ll be using in this program to
                                                       target the calves: Leg Press Calf Press, Standing Calf
                                                       Raise.







A B S



In the context of this program, by the “abs” we’re referring
to the rectus abdominis, also known as the 6-pack. The
main function of the 6-pack is to round the spine. This
will happen in exercises that bring the upper torso down
toward the legs (like in a crunch) and in exercises that
bring the legs up toward the upper torso (like in a leg
raise). Both are included in this program. There’s also
some direct work for the transverse abdominis and
obliques, although these muscles will play an important
stabilizing role in many exercises throughout the
program. 



Here is a list of exercises we’ll be using in this program to
target the abs: Cable Crunch, Roman Chair Leg Raise,
Machine Crunch, Ab Wheel Rollout.






                                                                The Bodybuilding Transformation System         39
Bodybuilding
 Nutrition




      The Bodybuilding Transformation System   40
In this section I’m going to boil down everything there is to know about bodybuilding nutrition to the bare
essentials. If you want your entire nutrition taken care of for you, I strongly recommend using the MacroFactor
App. You can try it out for 2 weeks for free here (if you use code JEFF). I’m a part owner of MacroFactor and I
truly believe it’s the best nutrition app on the market.



If you’d rather set your nutrition up on your own, you can manually follow the steps below.




S e t t i n g U p Y o u r C a l o r i e s



For your best results on this program, I recommend a 5-15% caloric surplus. The bigger the surplus, the more
fat you will gain alongside your muscle gain. If your goal while running this program is to lose fat while
building muscle, I’d suggest putting your calories at maintenance intake. If losing fat is your main priority, then
you’ll want to be in a 5-15% caloric deficit. Over the long term, larger deficits tend to result in more muscle loss
and less sustainable fat loss.



Being in a caloric surplus will provide the most muscle gain because it ensures that there is sufficient energy
to fuel your workouts and lay down new muscle tissue. Recent evidence suggests that going beyond a
~10-15% surplus results in disproportionate fat gain, without much, if any, extra muscle gain. Therefore, I
recommend a leaner bulk with a smaller surplus if you have goals related to aesthetics [17]. However, if you
are cool with gaining more fat alongside muscle, feel free to bump the surplus to 15-20% and you will gain
more total weight faster.



If you aren’t sure how to find your maintenance calories, here is a rough guide:



Method 1 (faster but less accurate)

    Multiply your weight (in lbs) by 14-18.

        If you are more active, you may be
        closer to bw x18 (or higher).



        If you are less active, you may be
        closer to bw x 14 (or lower).



        If you aren't sure, bw x 16 is usually
        reasonably accurate.




                                                              The Bodybuilding Transformation System           41
Method 2 (slower but more accurate)


   Guess-and-check: Track your bodyweight and
   caloric intake for 2 weeks.




   Calculate your average weight and average
   calories for Week 1 and Week 2.




   Determine average weight gained or lost from
   Week 1 to Week 2.




   Find your maintenance based on the weight
   change.



        If you maintained your weight, your average
        calories is your estimated maintenance




        If you lost 0.5-1 lbs, your maintenance will be
        roughly 200-500 calories above your average
        calories.




        If you gained 0.5-1 lbs, your maintenance will
        be roughly 200-500 calories below your
        average calories.





   Continue to guess-and-check for a few weeks
   until you find the intake at which you maintain
   your weight.




Let’s say you find that your maintenance is 2,500 calories. To put yourself in a 5-15% surplus you would add
125 to 375 calories to 2,500. That means your lean bulking intake would be 2,625 to 2,875 calories.




For a more detailed explanation of nutrition for fat loss, I recommend watching this video.




S e t t i n g U p Y o u r P r o t e i n





If you are planning to be in a caloric surplus (i.e. gaining) OR at maintenance (i.e. recomping) then you should
aim to eat:


   0.7-1 gram of protein per lb of bodyweight per day or




   1.6-2.2 grams of protein per kg of bodyweight per day




                                                             The Bodybuilding Transformation System         42
If you are planning to be in a caloric deficit (i.e. cutting) then you should aim to eat:




   0.8-1.2 grams of protein per lb of bodyweight per day or






   1.8-2.7 grams of protein per kg of bodyweight per day




If you are very overweight and carrying a high level of body fat, then you can use your height instead as a

rough guide for protein intake:







                                         Daily protein = height (in centimeters)




For example, if you are 180 cm (5’10”) tall, then 180 grams of protein is a reasonable target to aim for, whether

cutting, bulking or recomping.




     Note that using the height formula will still generally overestimate your true protein needs and most people will be

     able to build muscle just as well by eating ~20-40 grams less than what the height method predicts.




S e t t i n g   U p   Yo u r   Fat s   a n d   C a r b s






The fat and carb numbers are much less important from a bodybuilding standpoint than your calorie and

protein targets. However, if either gets too low, you can run into hormonal or performance issues.






Generally speaking, I suggest setting your fats at approximately 20-30% of your total caloric intake. For

example, if you’re eating 2,700 calories per day, 675 of those calories should come from fat. Since there are 9

calories in 1 gram of fat, that would equate to 75 grams of fat per day.






Carb intake will then be dictated by whatever calories are left over after figuring out your protein and fat

numbers. 






Again, your nutrition doesn’t need to be micromanaged or meticulously tracked in order to have success on

this program, but I’ve included this as additional information for those who are looking to line everything up.





                                                                    The Bodybuilding Transformation System              43
R e c o m m e n d e d N u t r i t i o n T r a c k i n g A p p



If you’re looking to track your nutrition intake while running this program, again, I strongly recommend using
the MacroFactor App. You can try it out for 2 weeks for free here (if you use code JEFF). 



Unlike most diet apps, it isn’t just a macro tracker. It’s quite literally a nutrition coach that uses science-based
algorithms to detect changes in your metabolism and make adjustments to your food intake at weekly check-
ins. This is super helpful for accountability. Here are a few other things that set the app apart:



                                                                  It has detailed micronutrient tracking (hey, health
                                                                  matters too!)



                                                                  It has the fastest food logger in existence, which
                                                                  means tracking really won’t feel like a chore once you
                                                                  give it a few days to get the hang of it.



                                                                  It also doesn’t punish you if you miss a day here and
                                                                  there, so you can be more chill about your diet overall.



                                                                  It can sync data with other smart devices. 



                                                                  It comes with a ton of nerdy analytics about your
                                                                  metabolism, goal tracking, weight trends, and plenty
                                                                  more.


                                                             If you try it out for 2 weeks, I’m quite certain that you’ll
                                                             love it and want to stick with it. There’s also a very active
                                                             Facebook group and subreddit, where you can ask
                                                             questions or post updates. I find these communities are
                                                             really helpful for accountability. If you do sign up, make
                                                             sure you get in there as well.




                                                                     The Bodybuilding Transformation System             44
Bodybuilding
Supplements


      The Bodybuilding Transformation System   45
Supplements will make up a tiny part of your success on this program. Here is a short list of supplements that

may help you make the most of your training:




               Creatine Monohydrate                                         Protein Powder




         Take 5 grams (1 tsp) per day at any                      Take as needed to hit daily protein

                     time of day                                                 goals




                      Caffeine




        Optionally take ~150-250mg ~30-60

        minutes before training when you are

            feeling more tired than usual




                                                           The Bodybuilding Transformation System        46
faq




  The Bodybuilding Transformation System   47
Q:   Did you run this program for a full year? Should I?





A:   I did, yes. I varied the exercises using substitution options, but other than that, yeah! I just ran this

     program back to back to back. In hindsight, I think I could have benefitted from a little more variation,

     but for the case study that I used this program for, we wanted things to be as controlled and

     consistent as possible.





     After finishing this program, you can run it back as long as you are making progress. If it starts to get

     stale, you can move onto one of the other programs on my website. 





     If you’re looking for ideas, I’ll be releasing a Specialization Program next, which is specifically written

     for more advanced trainees needing to bring up stubborn body parts. It’s one of the best programs

     I’ve ever created, in my opinion, so stay tuned for that in the coming months!







Q:   Can I include the Squat, Bench, and Deadlift?





A:   The squat, bench, and deadlift are some of my favorite exercises and they’re fantastic movements

     for strength development. They also activate a large amount of muscle mass and can be very

     effective tools for building muscle. However, there are a few things that make them less suitable for

     a bodybuilding program, where strength is not a priority.





     Instead of barbell squats, we’ll be doing smith machine squats and smith machine static lunges with

     an elevated front foot (except for cases when a substitution must be made due to lack of equipment

     access). Barbell bench press is featured in the first block of the program, but is swapped for

     machine chest press in block 2, due to the overall increase in volume. Instead of deadlifts from the

     floor, we will be doing Romanian deadlifts. 





     These more bodybuilding-style movements tend to offer a higher stimulus-to-fatigue ratio than the

     Big 3 Powerlifts. In other words, we get a similar (or higher) stimulus for less fatigue. The powerlifts

     are very systemically demanding and generally require more recovery. If we can get the same

     hypertrophic stimulus for less recovery demand, why not go for those instead? The powerlifts also

     require a lot of warm-up time – that’s time and energy that could be spent placing tension on the

     muscle. 





     For me, it ultimately boils down to efficiency. The powerlifts certainly can be effective muscle

     building tools, and they’re in virtually every other program of mine. However, because they’re so

     fatiguing compared to other similar exercises, they aren’t the most efficient tools for getting the job

     done when the goal is hypertrophy. For this reason, I would only recommend adding them into the

     program if you are very focused on maintaining strength with those lifts. If you choose to substitute

     them in, I would recommend lowering the reps to ~3-6.





                                                             The Bodybuilding Transformation System         48
Q:   I can only train 4x per week. How should I modify the program?





A:   To run this program on a 4x schedule, I would recommend simply carrying over the remaining

     workout/s into the following week. For example:





                                                    Week 1


                   Monday                                               Upper



                   Tuesday                                              Lower


                 Wednesday                                              Rest


                   Thursday                                              Pull


                    Friday                                              Push


                   Saturday                                             Rest


                    Sunday                                              Rest




                                                    Week 2



                   Monday                         Legs (carried over from Week 1 of the program)


                   Tuesday                                              Upper


                 Wednesday                                              Rest


                   Thursday                                             Lower


                    Friday                                               Pull


                   Saturday                                             Rest


                    Sunday                                              Rest




                                                    Week 3


                   Monday                         Push (carried over from Week 2 of the program)


                   Tuesday                        Legs (carried over from Week 2 of the program)


                 Wednesday                                              Rest


                   Thursday                                             Upper


                    Friday                                              Lower


                   Saturday                                             Rest


                    Sunday                                              Rest




                                                        The Bodybuilding Transformation System     49
Q:   There are no supersets within this program. Can I add them in?





A:   Yes! You are welcome to superset isolation exercises within the program to help save time, if

     needed. For example, in Week 1 of the program, you could choose to superset the Overhead Cable

     Triceps Extensions with Bayesian Cable Curls. This would mean alternating between these two

     exercises with minimal rest in between. The most important thing to keep in mind when creating

     supersets within the program is to avoid supersetting exercises that target the same muscle group.

     For example, you would not want to superset Overhead Cable Triceps Extensions with Cable Triceps

     Kickbacks.







Q:   The volume is lower than what I’m used to, should I add sets?





A:   I wouldn’t recommend it. I’ve been running this program as an advanced-elite level natural

     bodybuilder with over 15 years of serious lifting experience, and the volume feels perfect to me. The

     volumes included in this program are also in line with science-based recommendations from high

     level natural bodybuilding coaches. If you are more advanced than me, you can consider adding 1-2

     sets per week for a specific body part that you feel needs a little extra love. However, before turning

     to increase the volume, I would first ensure that your intensity/effort is on point. Are you truly

     pushing the last set to failure on all exercises, as suggested in the program? On these sets, are you

     pushing yourself as hard as you possibly can, as if $1,000,000 was on the line, and despite this

     maximum effort, you still can’t get the weight up with good form? This should be your first course of

     action, before turning to a volume increase. I suspect that the volume is not too low for >99% of

     people running this program. If it feels too low, you may not be executing the sets to the exertion

     level that I’ve prescribed in the program.







Q:   Can I choose to do a Substitution Option even if I can perform the original exercise?





A:   Try to do the main exercise listed if you can. I spent a lot of time curating the main exercises in this

     program and I do think they have some unique advantages in terms of tension profile, long muscle-

     length bias, and stimulus-to-fatigue ratio. However, if you don’t have access to the equipment to

     perform the main exercise, absolutely feel free to make a substitution. Also, if you try the main

     exercise for a few weeks and just aren’t feeling it, try one of the substitution options instead. The

     program was designed so that all substitution options will elicit a very similar training effect.







Q:   Do I need to time my rest periods in between sets?





A:   No. Generally speaking, longer rest periods are associated with better hypertrophy because resting

     longer in between sets allows you to recover more and perform more volume as a result. The most

     important thing is that you feel recovered between sets. However, you also don’t want to rest so long

     that you lose focus and the workout starts dragging on. You can time yourself in between sets if that

     helps keep you on track, but just keeping a rough eye on the clock is fine too.





                                                           The Bodybuilding Transformation System           50
Q:   My gym is crowded. Can I switch up the exercise order?


A:   Yes. Try not to completely scramble the workout, but switching a few exercises around won’t
     severely interfere with your ability to recover in between exercises and complete the workout
     properly.




Q:   How much muscle can I expect to gain?


A:   How you respond to training will be largely determined by genetic factors and your specific training
     history (i.e. how close you are to your genetic limit). As a rough ballpark estimate for untrained male
     individuals, 1-2 lbs of muscle gain per month is reasonable (12-24 lbs of muscle gained in your first
     year). For early intermediates with about 1 year of lifting experience, progress will likely slow down
     to roughly 0.5-1 lbs of muscle gain per month (6-12 lbs of muscle gained in your second year).
     Beyond that, muscle gain from person to person will be highly variable, depending on how much
     you’ve already been optimizing your training and nutrition. For practical purposes, women can divide
     muscle gain estimates in half.




Q:   I’m not getting sore from my workouts. Is the program not working?


A:   Muscle soreness is not required for hypertrophy to occur and it isn’t even a reliable proxy that you
     had an effective workout. Plenty of activities can make your muscles sore, but be wholly ineffective
     at building muscle, such as running a marathon or getting a “charlie horse”. In fact, reduced
     soreness over time can be a good thing as it may indicate that your body is adapting and recovering.
     If you are pushing yourself hard, executing the exercises with good form and being consistent with
     the workouts, soreness isn’t something you need to be chasing.




Q:   I’m getting very sore from my workouts. Should I skip the gym until I’m not sore?


A:   You may experience increased soreness when you first begin the program because it is presenting a
     new stress to your body. Some research shows that foam rolling can help reduce soreness [17, 18].
     So, if you are consistently getting sore week after week, consider adding a short 3-5 minute foam
     rolling routine at the end of the workouts. Otherwise, training while sore is not inherently problematic
     for muscle growth. If you’re having a difficult time getting into position for any of the planned
     exercises, or finding it difficult to complete a full ROM due to soreness, it would be wise to skip that
     exercise until you feel properly recovered. Otherwise, in the case of mild soreness, perform a slightly
     longer warm-up for each exercise and use your own discretion as to whether you should complete
     the exercise or leave it for another day.




                                                        The Bodybuilding Transformation System          51
Q:   Why is there such little exercise variation from week to week?


A:   Changing exercises from week to week is more likely to flatten out the strength progression curve.
     Within each block, exercises are kept mostly constant to ensure both progression (by adding volume
     incrementally to these specific movements) and mastery of exercise form and technique. Then, after
     each block, the exercises are switched up to keep things fresh and novel.

Q:   Should I add cardio to this program?


A:   The main point of cardio from a bodybuilding
     standpoint is to establish a caloric deficit for
     fat loss. I would recommend prioritizing the
     deficit from your diet first, rather than relying
     heavily on cardio.


     As a general rule, I recommend keeping cardio
     to an effective minimum on this program. If you
     wish to do cardio to achieve your fat loss goals
     or for general health and fitness, try to keep it to
     4-5 low-moderate intensity sessions per week,
     around 20-30 minutes in duration. High
     intensity cardio should be used more sparingly,
     up to once or twice weekly at your own
     discretion. Cardio won’t kill your gains, but it
     can interfere with your recovery if performed
     excessively. Monitor your own recovery, and if
     you’re progressing fine, then whatever cardio
     you’re doing isn’t a big deal. If your progress is
     slowing and you feel very fatigued during or
     after workouts, you may want to cut back on
     the cardio.




Q:   What do I do after I finish the program?


A:   Since I ran this program for a full year, I
     designed it to loop back seamlessly. After
     completing Week 12, you can jump right back
     into Week 1, which serves as a deload.




                                                            The Bodybuilding Transformation System   52
comments from jeff
For customer support please visit

jeffnippard.com/contact.
 As much as I love
connecting on social media, I am not able to
reliably respond to the questions I receive across
platforms so please direct any questions to the
email above. Please allow 2-3 business days for
an email reply.



Thank you so much for your support and good
luck with the training!





                                                     The Bodybuilding Transformation System   53
references
 [ 1 ]



 Wackerhage H, Schoenfeld BJ, Hamilton DL, Lehti M, Hulmi JJ. Stimuli and sensors that initiate
           skeletal muscle hypertrophy following resistance exercise. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2019 Jan
           1;126(1):30-43.



 [ 2 ]


 Wilk M, Zajac A, Tufano JJ. The Influence of Movement Tempo During Resistance Training on Muscular
          Strength and Hypertrophy Responses: A Review. Sports Med. 2021 Aug;51(8):1629-1650.



 [ 3 ]



 Wolf, M., Androulakis-Korakakis, P., Fisher, J., Schoenfeld, B., & Steele, J. Partial Vs Full Range of Motion
           Resistance Training: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. International Journal of Strength and
           Conditioning. 2023 Aug; 3(1).



 [ 4 ]



 Steele J, Malleron T, Har-Nir I, Androulakis-Korakakis P, Wolf M, Fisher JP, Halperin I. Are Trainees
           Lifting Heavy Enough? Self-Selected Loads in Resistance Exercise: A Scoping Review and Exploratory
           Meta-analysis. Sports Med. 2022 Dec;52(12):2909-2923.



 [ 5 ]



 Robinson ZP, Pelland JC, Remmert JF, Refalo MC, Jukic I, Steele J, and Zourdos MC, (2023). Exploring
           the Dose-Response Relationship Between Estimated Resistance Training Proximity to Failure, Strength
           Gain, and Muscle Hypertrophy: A Series of Meta-Regressions.



 [ 6 ]



 Refalo MC, Helms ER, Trexler ET, Hamilton DL, Fyfe JJ. Influence of Resistance Training Proximity-to-
           Failure on Skeletal Muscle Hypertrophy: A Systematic Review with Meta-analysis. Sports Med. 2023
           Mar;53(3):649-665.



 [ 7 ]



 Baz-Valle E, Balsalobre-Fernández C, Alix-Fages C, Santos-Concejero J. A Systematic Review of The
           Effects of Different Resistance Training Volumes on Muscle Hypertrophy. J Hum Kinet. 2022 Feb
           10;81:199-210.



 [ 8 ]



 Schoenfeld BJ, Ogborn D, Krieger JW. Dose-response relationship between weekly resistance training
           volume and increases in muscle mass: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Sports Sci. 2017
           Jun;35(11):1073-1082.



 [ 9 ]



 Schoenfeld BJ, Vigotsky A, Contreras B, Golden S, Alto A, Larson R, Winkelman N, Paoli A. Differential
           effects of attentional focus strategies during long-term resistance training. Eur J Sport Sci. 2018
           Jun;18(5):705-712.



[ 10 ]

 Hernández-Belmonte A, Martínez-Cava A, Buendía-Romero Á, Franco-López F, Pallarés JG. Free-Weight
         and Machine-Based Training Are Equally Effective on Strength and Hypertrophy: Challenging a
         Traditional Myth. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2023 Aug 2.




                                                                The Bodybuilding Transformation System            54
[ 11 ]



    Earp JE, Angelino D, Hatfield DL, Colantuono V, Jackson ER, Morgan KD, Adami A, Melanson KJ,
              Blazevich AJ. Differing hypertrophy patterns from open and closed kinetic chain training affect
              quadriceps femoris center of mass and moment of inertia. Front Physiol. 2023 Mar 14;14:1074705.




[ 12 ]



    Evangelista AL, De Souza EO, Moreira DCB, Alonso AC, Teixeira CVS, Wadhi T, Rauch J, Bocalini DS,
              Pereira PEA, Greve JMD. Interset Stretching vs. Traditional Strength Training: Effects on Muscle
              Strength and Size in Untrained Individuals. J Strength Cond Res. 2019 Jul;33 Suppl 1:S159-S166.




[ 13 ]



    Van Every DW, Coleman M, Rosa A, Zambrano H, Plotkin D, Torres X, Mercado M, De Souza EO, Alto A,
              Oberlin DJ, Vigotsky AD, Schoenfeld BJ. Loaded inter-set stretch may selectively enhance muscular
              adaptations of the plantar flexors. PLoS One. 2022 Sep 1;17(9):e0273451.




[ 14 ]




   Businari GB, Brigatto FA, de Camargo JBB, Soares EG, Braz TV, Batista DR, Col LO, Dias WG, Rosolem
              JM, Prestes J, Marchetti PH, Lopes CR. Chronic Effects of Inter-Set Static Stretching on
              Morphofunctional Outcomes in Recreationally Resistance-Trained Male and Female. Res Q Exerc
              Sport. 2023 Jan 13:1-14.




[ 15 ]


     Chaabene H, Behm DG, Negra Y, Granacher U. Acute Effects of Static Stretching on Muscle Strength
              and Power: An Attempt to Clarify Previous Caveats. Front Physiol. 2019 Nov 29;10:1468.




[ 16 ]


     Nuckols, Greg. “Body Composition Assessments Are Less Useful than You Think.” MacroFactor, April
              20, 2023. https://macrofactorapp.com/body-composition/.




[ 17 ]



    Pearcey GE, Bradbury-squires DJ, Kawamoto JE, Drinkwater EJ, Behm DG, Button DC. Foam rolling for
              delayed-onset muscle soreness and recovery of dynamic performance measures. J Athl Train.
              2015;50(1):5-13.




[ 18 ]
       Macdonald GZ, Button DC, Drinkwater EJ, Behm DG. Foam rolling as a recovery tool after an intense
              bout of physical activity. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2014;46(1):131-42.




                                                                  The Bodybuilding Transformation System          55
